# Contemporary Issues In Data
### Authored by Catherine Benge

## Introduction
As technology and science have evolved over the 21st century, there are a whole new host of issues concerning privacy and DNA collection. One such example is the Combined DNA Index System (CODIS), a database containing DNA samples and identification from “over 14,403,505 offender profiles, 4,209,972 arrestee profiles and 1,075,677 forensic profiles as of December 2020”([src: fbi.gov](https://www.fbi.gov/services/laboratory/biometric-analysis/codis/ndis-statistics)). This database has helped the efficiency of the United States criminal justice system, but may also exacerbate existing human rights and equity concerns among marginalized groups. The two articles I examine in this short write-up speak from a position of support, and one of criticism. 

## Article Directory
1. [How DNA Databases can reduce crime](#one)
2. [How DNA Databases can exacerbate racial bias](#two)

## How DNA Databases Can Reduce Crime<a name="one"></a>
[Article (Bloomberg)](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-02-01/dna-databases-are-better-crime-deterrent-than-long-prison-time)

Mass incarceration is a major issue in the United States today. In fact, the United States has the largest population of incarcerated individuals in the world. Not only is this expensive, it pulls incarcerated individuals into a cycle of imprisonment, crime, and poverty that is very difficult for one to break. Jennifer Doleac argues in her Bloomberg Opinion piece that DNA Databases may serve as an alternative to mass incarceration simply by deterring potential criminals from committing those crimes in the first place. This Database in question, the Combined DNA Index System (CODIS), already exists in the United States. In the 2013 Supreme Court ruling Maryland v. King, the United States Government’s right to collect DNA from individuals involved in a crime was deemed constitutional ([src:supremecourt.gov](https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/12-207_d18e.pdf)). Since then, the database has expanded to include around 20 million profiles nationwide, as stated on the FBI’s website. 

Doleac’s argument derives from data that already exists about crime rates and DNA databases in Denmark. She points out that Denmark has much “richer and more available data” to study: after 2005, any individual convicted of a “felony-level” crime in Denmark was registered to their DNA database. Any individuals convicted before this date were not. While crime statistics may fluctuate or decrease for any combination of factors, Doleac does note that crime decreased in Denmark post-2005 by “a whopping 42%”. This number, as stated previously, may not be an accurate reflection of the direct impact of DNA databases and crime rates. However, it is a big enough number to raise inquiries about whether DNA databases could be enriched and used more effectively to direct public policy in the United States.   

There are several possible advantages to this: first, many people would commit less crimes, some of which may involve violent crimes like armed robberies and homicides. Additionally, less people would be incarcerated in the U.S. Finally, CODIS also includes data from forensic cases, including crimes unsolved. DNA databases could also be used to bring justice to the families of those murdered or lost decades ago, which is a cause worth looking into. In conclusion, DNA databases in the United States have shown to help solve cold cases and possibly deter crime. With more accurate, higher quality data, these statistics might become even more significant. 

## How DNA Databases Can Exacerbate Existing Bias<a name="two"></a>
[Article (The Verge)](https://www.theverge.com/2020/1/14/21063627/dna-detained-immigrants-fbi-codis-bias-crime-database)

On the other hand, DNA databases pose a huge risk for personal privacy. One recurring theme since the conception of algorithms, artificial intelligence, and the use of datasets and databases to store human data is bias. Nicole Wetsman points out in her article that these biases both in data and the application of data by humans can enact very material consequences on marginalized groups. Wetsman’s concern is over the decision made by the FBI and Department of Homeland Security to begin including immigrants in CODIS. This, she points out, has two potential consequences: one, the database will accentuate the bias that exists towards non-white individuals in the United States, and two, that the database will exacerbate policing bias in its shift from current to future criminals.

Wetsman’s first concern is that CODIS is already biased as a database, noting that African Americans made up 40% of its profiles in 2011, even though they were only 13% of the United States population. Adding immigrants to the system, who are primarily non-white individuals, will skew the data even more. And, as Wetsman points out, “Having a larger proportion of DNA from some groups means it’s more likely that crimes that group commits are solved, even if they’re not committing more crimes overall”. In summary, adding all immigrants to the database would classify them as potential criminals with minimal evidence, and would provide all the DNA data necessary to implicate them in crimes at rates that far exceed American citizens.

Another concern is that bias and policing in the United States will be made worse with the use of CODIS to track “potential” criminals instead of convicted criminals only. Wetsman explains this argument with some context: CODIS was originally created to include the DNA of criminals after they were caught. Over the years, it has expanded to arrestees and those who were not convicted of crimes — and therefore may be innocent. Now, the list also includes immigrants, who may be entered into the system as young as 14. Finally, Wetsman closes their essay with a forward-looking statement: if the FBI is allowed to add profiles of law-abiding people to their crime database, where will they stop? In summary, the creep of data collection is a major threat to privacy in the United States, and holds very real consequences for non-white individuals, who are already the subject of systemic policing bias in the United States. While CODIS may be effective at stopping crime, it may also do so in a way that is unfair and violating to certain groups of people based on these biases, if they are not addressed.  

## Thank you for Reading!
